I start the bird survey again at the end of March.
I monitor the dippers and greewag deals from Pycon, they call it.
Right.
I follow the river all the way up the Cran Can Reservoir, the topside of Ebbw Vale.
That's the source of the river Ebbw.
Along that piece of river and the adjoining river which is the Ebbw Valle,
I've got over 40 nests of dipper and around about 20 odd nests I record every year of grey wagdale.
And two of those sites are beyond the navigation.
Both ends of the long tunnel.
So the north end and the south end both have dipper nests.
And the south end has definitely got a red-legged grey wagdale nest in it.
And the top end, the north end occasionally a grey wagdale nest.
When I first started doing it, which is now 11 years ago,
I could just walk around the end of the fence with my ladle on my shoulder.
And of course it's become more secure than that since.
So I now get the code off Vira and I go there probably four times a year,
depending on the timing of the nesting.
Possibly a fifth sometimes if I missed the timing things.
It's all part of a monitoring scheme with the British Trust of Ornithology.
The 40 odd dipper nest that I record is just a drop in the ocean for the British Trust of Ornithology.
But when they pull all these drops in the ocean together,
they get a good idea of what's going on in the ornithological world.
And it's good fun, I enjoy doing it. That's the main thing.
Do you do it on your own? Do you have to be very quiet?
Mainly on my own. I sometimes take a trainee bird-bringer along with me.
Somebody who's interested in photography maybe comes along, but most of the time I do it on my own.
What about the time of day? I presume that's important.
I try to do it between dawn and midday. It's the quieter part of the day.
You spend a devil lot of time chatting with people otherwise, and I love chatting with people,
but it doesn't get the job done.
You know, I'll stand on the back door and I'll chat for about 20 minutes and I think,
God, I think I've done another dipper's nest by now, you know.
So I try to do it early morning and by midday, well, I've had enough quite much.
I've sent years of age and the wall out by midday, so I go and have lunch and bobby feed up.
So if you go and say that you're looking at the bottom of the tunnel and you see a nest,
how can you tell if it's active, if there's eggs in it?
Well, generally, you know, I can look at the nest, we'll put in the ladder again,
it's kind of a small ladder wouldn't you, whether, we'll put in the ladder against the wall
and you can see it's fresh, it's been rebuilt.
And as you're clamouring around your ladder, the dipper usually flies out anyway.
You know, so, but mostly you've got to actually go up to the nest and put your hand in
and feel it and see what's in there, count the eggs, count the young as they're having.
Timing you can usually do pretty well because you'll know the timing of the breeding.
When the young are about a cent-eight days old, it's ideal time to put rings on them,
which will identify them as individuals for the rest of their life then.
And the adults will have colour rings on them.
So I say, oh yes, it's red over blue, that's the female from Crumlin South or whatever,
without having to catch them again.
I actually put three, there's either a red or a yellow on the left leg
and that indicates male or female.
So if it's yellow it's a female, if it's red it's a male.
On the other leg there's two colour rings and those two colour rings identifies it at that centre,
a female from Crumlin South or a male from a young school or whatever.
So they're identified forevermore as individuals.
For the first time this year I had a male who was eight years old.
It equals a record lifespan for the tipper.
So he's not going to be able to do the next screen I wouldn't think.
I'd be really pleased to think he is, but I don't think he's going to.
He's such an old blinder, nested under an old arch bridge there,
a real ancient old brick arch bridge there.
He's not nested there for eight years, he's been in four different places along the river,
at four different ways over the eight years.
Well what happens is one dies off and then the other one has to move to find a mate
or stay put and sing and attract a mate.
But you get bigamous males, very often get one male with two nest sites,
there are all sorts of complications.
And this guy was born down at Abertaweery by the fire station there,
he was a pulley or a baby the next day.
He went from there to another site just up in the park there,
Abertaweery Park.
From there he went all the way up the valley to the little site stream which is,
yeah, come to there, yeah.
And he read young there and then he went down then to just below Blenau
where I recorded him last year.
So he got up at the third pit in those eight years.
And I know all that because he's got the colourings on his neck so I can just look
and tell you where he's from.
So how many different colours do you have?
I'm just throwing the maths in my head.
I think it's 14 colours and then of course you can make ever so many combinations of that.
Right, well I assume you don't have to read them.
When you run out of one combination you can switch the male ring to the other leg
and start all over again.
So I think I can sum it up around 200 combinations I can do.
There's some of them that are not so easy to see.
There's obviously red, blue, green.
There's a brown, there's a yellow.
There's a shocking pink, a real shocking pink.
And then there's an ordinary pink.
Don't combine those if I can help it.
There's an orange which very often gets mistaken for brown.
Black and white, yeah.
They're easy to see colours, they're really easy ones.
What about green?
Yeah, they do green.
Surprisingly easy to identify, you'd think it wouldn't be, wouldn't it?
Yeah, you'd think it would be.
Biggest mistakes are between orange and red.
And shocking pink after about three or four years goes not so shocking,
it goes more pinkish.
I don't want to complicate that.
Every baby gets a shocking pink ring on his right leg.
That tells me it's a young bird that hasn't been ringed as a breeding bird.
So when he's re-caught, he gets then his twin pullers.
Soon as I can catch him after the first year.
So I see a shocking pink pulley, as I call them.
Pulley means baby bird basically.
You see when there's a shocking pink ring on it on the river,
and you purposely put a net up to catch it.
So how do you catch it? Is that a big net?
Long, fine, fine, fine, fine net stretched across the river.
And there's four pockets, there are four loops.
And as the bird hits the net, he forms a loop on the other side,
and he's in that pocket.
There's strands going through the netting,
and those strands form four pockets in the net, all the way through the river.
And as the bird hits the net, he pushes the net forward and down,
so he gets trapped in that pocket.
Sometimes you get two, yeah, because the net is very flexible,
you know, they're very loose pockets.
And that's good, if you can catch male and female together, bang, bang, screaming, that's good.
Do they get distressed, or do they like freeze?
There's obviously stress involved, but the fact is, you know, that male's been there for eight years,
so couldn't be that bad, could it?
Can you tell, is it easy to tell how old they are?
The BVO keeps a catalogue, a computerised catalogue, of course, of all the colouring.
So they'll know my colour combinations.
And if a bird just comes in as a searching of colourings,
they'll be able to tell you whether it's mine or one from up north, from Wales or whatever.
I had one come down to somewhere south of Newbridge, and that one came from Midwilch.
He'd come, I don't know how many kilometres he'd come, and it was a male.
That's the furthest travel dip I've had up until now.
The furthest one for me went from Aberdeleby over to Ponlepleve.
There's a large sewage works there, just below Ponlepleve,
and a bird ring caught in a net there on the sewage works, well, on the river adjacent to the sewage works.
And that's my furthest one at the moment.
But I had one come to me from way up in Midwilch.
So mine would be going that far as well, just so nobody's caught me.
Can you tell until they get bigger after that first year?
No, just change influence. They start off with a speckledy colour, like a baby robin.
A young robin in his first few months is just speckledy colour all over.
And young dippers are like that as well, just speckledy all over.
By the autumn, they look exactly like their parents and can't tell the difference.
So then I'm looking for rings. I'm looking for colour rings.
Or the lack of, if there's no rings on one of the adults feeding at the nest,
I'll put a net in my catching and put rings on them.
Because in time it will save me and the bird a lot of stress.
Well, not stress for me, it's quite fun for me going up to.
It's all empty instinct job, isn't it?
But it will save the bird a lot of stress of being caught and ringed and so on.
And do they really spend all, well, they can't spend all their life on the river.
Pretty well, yeah.
Because obviously they have to leave the river to go from one to three.
But what they're doing is following little river that's sort of stream that's over the mountains.
That's how they've done it. They've followed a little stream that's up a mountain, down a mountain, whatever.
So what do they feed on?
Even down to the seashore and back up a river.
Right.
That's been known as well. They've been caught down on, feeding on the Esfydl.
And of course they'll go up another river and find one there.
It's young birds looking for territories of their own.
Most movement is done in that first year. Long distant movements.
Right.
But these intermediate movements are because one of the pairs has died off.
What's happening is there's a male looking for a territory and he stumbles along the territory.
There's a male in it but it's got a female in it, you know, and vice versa.
If it's a male looking for a female, you'll sit on a rock in the middle of the river and sing until one comes along, basically.
You know, that's what all this singing is about, you know, whether it be a blackbird or whatever.
So they pretty much do mate for life then? It's only when one of them...
Well, it's difficult to say really, but I'd rather think they do because of the longevity of the ones I know of, you know.
You do have the bigamous ones. I've had a male servicing three nets.
To have two is not an unusual talk.
That's not unusual.
Not unusual at all.
But along the river you'll have a male down here that's got another female, three nest territories further up.
So he's crossing two other territories to get to his other female, you know.
Wow, those four years.
But he wouldn't think that would happen, but it does, it does, yeah.
And what would it actually feed on and what do they feed the babies on?
They feed them almost entirely on insect larvae out of the water.
Caddis fly, mayfly and so on.
Of course, their breeding is timed to when those things are walking up the walls, coming out of the water, actually out of their little cocoons.
And the dippers are very, very young in that period.
Well, there you go, that's what they start nesting.
They're nesting nests building now.
You know, they're all in territory repairing and building nests now.
Already?
They will repair the same old nest year.
Like I've got a dipper nest sabacan like this.
But all there in a very deep cut in is the river.
Big tunnel that goes under the one on the flats, the tunnel.
I was told about that nest by an old chap who took eggs from there when he was a boy.
Now, if you work it out, that nest had been nesting like 50 odd years.
And it's still there now, it's still using it.
Of course, it's a combination of the one with the pair dying off, another one coming in, the other one dies off, another one comes in.
I took the guy there and I said, where's the nest then?
He said, it's just below that pipe he said in the mottage, he said on the wall.
I said, that's right, it's still there now.
It's that same spot where he took eggs out when he was a boy.
And it worked out like 56 years ago or something.
It's incredible, isn't it?
That is incredible, yeah.
The beauty of those old industrial sites, there's walls and tunnels and bridges and it's still there, the old stonework.
And when they built these arches, I'm the builder, sorry, I know what I'm talking about.
When you build an arch, you build a former, a wooden former, yeah?
And this rests on pieces of steel or wood in the wall, mostly wood, because you could just cut it off and leave it there afterwards.
So along the bottom where the arch meets the upright, along here there's a series of holes where the wood was long long,
because it had rotted out 20 years ago, and left these nice 16 holes and that's where you find a lot of them in there.
You know, some of them, I got one at the old site there at Abbott-le-Eddy and at Deverdell, I'll find this one, they changed their site.
And then they started using a Dipper diadote. They put two foot above the water, it's all in the arch.
What shape is the Dipper's Nest?
Well, a Dipper's Nest is quite bulky, it's football size. So in the old, it's only like this big, but then they bring a big canopy out over the top and a big bowl underneath,
and you've got to put your hand up in like that to get in there, you know, just up and in. You can't look in the nest.
There's this big canopy over the top and that keeps the end of the trip in water, there's a lot of water in these situations, you know,
and so a lot of water's tripping over and it hides the nest from predators and that. It's quite the construction.
It takes some months to make it, it's not something that a blackbird builds in a week or something. These dippers take months to build these nests.
The biggest predators I have found has been crows and macaws in this, because they get way the younger, the younger they go looking.
But if it's further up the tunnel, of course they're afraid to go in places like that. So the situation is in the protection mainly.
If it's low on the water, they're vulnerable to an otter or something, a mink. Not too many these days, but there's mink along the river, and there's otters along the river.
Do you see evidence of that along the site?
All the time, yeah, all the time. So, but the biggest predators would be avian predators. Your macaw or a crow would hear the young calling for food.
They're feeding their own food.
And they can get in at the entrance.
They just came to the wall and put their head in.
Don't get a devil lot of predation. Predation every year would be down as much as 10% probably, you know, the nests, which is not a lot.
Whereas an open nest for black birds and song fish and everything like that, they must lose every other one, everything.
But they've all got a part to play, you know. You know, magbys stealing the eggs and the younger birds. But it's all part of the natural cycle of events, you know.
Magbys do a good job, otherwise, you know, cleaning up dead things and things like that.
And another thing that is peculiar to the dipper, I don't know any other bird that does it, they build their nest directly over the water.
They don't carry the fecal sack away. The youngsters just do it straight out to the nest.
But it goes straight into the water. And that's another deterrent for predators. If they don't find the drop-ins, they don't find the nest.
They never ever find the dipper's nest that is not directly over the water, unless the water has receded tremendously.
And then, as I sat and took photographs at the nest and I couldn't believe what I was watching, the female, there was pebbles there because the river receded so much, the nest now was no longer over the water.
So you'd go in, feed the young, drop down to the pebbles, clean up the drop-ins off the pebbles, and go down to the river and wash your billy in the river.
And every time they'd come to feed, that's what they would do. They would feed the young, drop down to the pebbles, clean up the mess, go to the river, wash their billy in the river.
When they first had seen that, they couldn't believe it was happening, but they probably do it all the time.
I photographed the bird coming and going, but you can't sort of prove it.
You said all that so quickly, and they don't go to the exact place in the river every time, so you can't focus your camera on one spot.
They still have a photograph of that.